it is such a pleasure for me to host
Stan Greenberg tonight you you all know
he's written this book which has a
phenomenal title I guess depending on
your point of view politically it's
called our IP GOP how the new America is
doing the Republicans and I just if you
case you start flipping to the actual
text make sure you stop on the
dedication page because he dedicates the
book to the women's March and the
resistance which is worth noting so I
thought that was original and much
appreciated by at least people like me
Stan and I cross paths in my previous
incarnation as a speechwriter in the
Clinton White House back in the Jurassic
period of American politics
he was then assessing voter moods and
preferences and providing political
strategy as Bill Clinton's chief
pollster now helping an upstart young
governor win the presidency and then
becoming one of his chief advisors would
be the high-water mark for most
political professionals but in Stan's
case it's just one of the many ways in
which he's influenced progressive
politics and policies over a remarkable
career let me just say that one of his
very very best moves politically and
personally was marrying rosa DeLauro who
was here somewhere there she is in the
back I hope you all know she is not only
a smart and wonderful and great woman
she's also one of the most consistently
progressive feminist voices in the
United States House of Representatives
from Connecticut so great to have you
here and also great to have some other
Greenberg family members who are chips
off the block when it comes to being
active in trying to write the world's
wrongs in addition to working with
leading political figures here in
overseas and found in Greenberg Research
Associates and two progressive
organizations democracy core and citizen
opinion Stan also is a prolific author
of best-selling books perhaps the thing
we care most about here are IP GOP is I
think your tenth book is that right it's
up there he's I think he's in double
digits and it really is a must read for
anyone who's trying to make sense of the
maddening politics of the current moment
without
you know driving themselves off a cliff
Stan will will describe in more detail
his theory of the case but in brief it's
at the Republican Party beginning
several iterations ago but now
especially under Donald Trump is
increasingly out of touch with the
realities of a multicultural multiracial
more secular more egalitarian less
tradition-bound
and much younger America with Stan calls
the new America and that in clinging to
an old and outdated version of America
Republicans will pay a price in 2020
he'll explain I think maybe I hope that
even the victory of a Republican in the
special election yesterday in North
Carolina's ninth congressional district
is evidence of the new America fighting
back against Trump republicanism Stan's
insights are rooted in the politics of
the past several decades often
overlooked in current analyses and they
help him explain which voting groups
will be a key to a Democratic victory in
the presidential election and beyond the
galvanization of this new America he
says quote bloody the GOP in 2018 and
we'll finally crash it in 2020 now I'm
because I'm the owner of a bookstore and
we do care about we really do genuinely
care about debate and discussion I will
present although you probably know from
my past experiences where my politics
are I will present a face of neutrality
here but I will tell you that I was
speaking to a good friend today and
encouraging him to come to the event and
I told him what the book was about and
he said just tell Stan from his polling
data to God's ears and to the polling
booths in 2020 so Stan thank you for
sharing for writing the book thank you
for sharing your conclusions with us and
for being here at pnp it's such a great
pleasure to have you
[Laughter]
thank you very much and thank you Lisa
Thank You politics and prose everybody
in this community knows it but is is in
fact our neighborhood bookstore here in
Union market and members of our family
are here we also have a Connecticut
branch and our part of the family are
also visit that and so this is our this
is our family bookstore wherever our
family lives in the Washington area and
they look to it for to be to know the
world and have an expansive view of the
world and let my I should shout out not
just rosa DeLauro was here dana Milbank
is here and an agreement sadie and i
assume other grandchildren are in the
mix but the they are what matter and
actually in the in in the
acknowledgments i say this is the first
book that wasn't dedicated to my wife or
grandchildren and and i focused on the
woman's march and the resistance and for
reasons that i think you'll see my wife
is i dedicate the book in practice at
the end you'll see i say this is her
moment she really is in the front lines
she's the one who had to go to the
inauguration and the election of
President Trump I skipped that day but
she did but she is she's the one who
carries on those fights and I do find
that in almost every interview the
interviewer will say well Stan Greenberg
is married to the most fabulous member
of Congress rosa DeLauro sometimes if
they do that on air sometimes not but
that's I'm stuck with it the I do want
to thank Thomas Dunne my publisher Tom
copyrighted the title ripped GOP a rest
in peace GOP now if you if you look at
the book the book that has the long list
of books that I've written the ten books
near the bottom of that
you'll see one book that's named race
and state in capitalist development a
comparative perspective now there is a
cult following for that book but it does
not shout out and apartheid now but it
might have but I had I talked to Tom I
might have been different when I and
what I have discovered with this title
is that if I leave the jacket at a table
in a cafe or if or if my desk were
working on earlier the seller if people
will come with abandon and come up to me
and say is it true are you sure
I hope you're right and at the last
hotel of our vacation and breakfast
someone came up a man came up at
breakfast and walked up ignored roses if
he was not there for the first time in
our lives and said have you finished it
you know is it really true so I have
started carrying my book in a newspaper
in order to in order to be in order to
be protected and so it's been a long
it's a long way from race and state and
capitals development I want to thank
c-span as here book notes as filming and
they'll be filming my remarks and also
your questions and answers as we talk
about the book now I wrote this book as
I wrote in the introduction because I
had to you know after Trump's election
I heard Lee hurriedly you know wrote
pieces op-ed pieces in The Guardian the
New York Times democracy Journal
Democratic strategist most of all the
American Prospect the Washington Post
had run a number of my piece my thinking
before the election I did I attended
every seminar that my files are
organized that they have held trying to
understand what had happened in the
election but it really was the women's
of our joining the women's March
and what happened that day which was
electric intense and said immense things
which also turned out to be true and
what I what I wrote in the in the
acknowledgments is when I woke up the
day when I woke up the next day and
every day I asked myself what have I
done today to resist and make sure
Donald Trump is repudiated
I couldn't sleep most nights and as it
turns out many millions more or reacting
in the same way they got involved gave
money attended marches descended on Town
Hall's rushed airports to protect Muslim
refugees I decided to write a book
because of the resistance most of most
of whom were painfully uncertain how
this would all turn out I wrote it
because of the opposite
I believe Donald Trump's victory was the
last desperate battle of a tea party
dominated Republican party to stop an
unstoppable new America from governing
and they would fail
indeed Trump getting the nomination
confirmed the story Trump winning the
election accelerated the defeat of his
party whose battle against modernity but
have it shattered from governing would
make the great majority of the country
newly conscious of their own values
beliefs and priorities people thought I
was smoking I hope you I hope you know
I'm right
nobody would believe me until the
country was swept by a blue wave of 2018
but not that either
I couldn't even convince James Carville
my partner so we'll have to wait until
the 2020 blue wave they'd be truly
convinced that what Trump has left left
the office
so when I when I finished his book and
began to think about these kinds of
lectures and began to think about what
his contribution would be I asked what
is it
that is different about this book than
others that have been written about this
period because I don't just talk about a
shattering defeat of the Republicans I
write about the demise of the Republican
Party I don't just talk about the defeat
and repudiation of the Republicans I
talk about a new era of activist
government what is that based on it
turns out I learned a lot from writing
history reading and writing the history
of the Republican Party writing about
the using social sciences on the
findings about public attitudes during
that period and also my own in-depth
research with Republicans who I listened
to very closely on why they were what
the why they were doing what they were
what they were doing what I discovered
is America really needs to be understood
as confronting a whole series of
historic junctures where social
movements protests political
organization party realignment came out
of new major laws or court action that
changed our social relationships they
made a whole series of them civil rights
abortion and contraception abortion
being legal and contraception being
legal immigration expanding all of the
ledges all of the all of the legislation
the court action as a whole each time
made is freer more equal more democratic
junctures where political parties were
forced to choose and what we found was
that at each juncture the Democratic
Party with though he was divided
ultimately aligned with those changes
accepted those changes and that became
part of his identity at each juncture
the Republican Party
with a base in the south expanded it
expanded deep south at first the whole
South eventually into the more
Appalachian and rural parts of the
country with an evangelical base with
that base resisted civil rights resisted
abortion and expansion of and
contraception and the sexual revolution
and expand and resisted in legal
immigration all of which defined the the
two parties in very special ways let me
read from the beginning of the chapter
on the history of the Republican Party
the Republican Party is trapped in an
ever more desperate counter-revolution
against accumulative and accelerating
trends that are producing a new America
is a party defined and divided by its a
leaders unrepentant struggle and against
an America that is more and more
racially diverse
it has also a battle to slow the growth
secularism the decline of the
traditional family and the growing
independence of women and their sexual
freedom is the fight against a rising
immigration and foreign presence and in
its Tea Party and Donald Trump stage it
is a party pitted against the growing
Millennial Generation the young and
against the growing metropolitan centers
were very different values are taken for
granted and now defended the party was
shaped through the struggle over civil
rights the book describes and a lot of
detail more than I knew how the two
parties dealt with civil rights and the
and their and the role of the equal
rights affirmative action for
african-americans it deals with the the
abortion rulings and the rights to
contraception and privacy and how the
two parties dealt with that and it book
deals with most importantly I think with
immigration which I came to see how
central it was and how important Pat
Buchanan was to a Republican Party that
ultimately produced a Donnell
truck because he Pat Buchanan was the
economic was the nationalist
and actually out of favor in his own
party but in fact much more aligned with
growing anti-immigrant trend of the
party at the base of the party in
California and where we had prop 97 but
also as the party became nationalized
the immigration issue but it was
President Barack Obama Barack Hussein
Obama who who brought all this together
I I used to think that was a stage in
this process but I actually believe it
all came to fruition the battle over
civil rights the rights of women
immigration all came together with the
election of an african-american
president with a coalition a diverse
coalition that of the new America that
kind of represent that was trying to
expand government activist government to
deal with the deep recession and also
the affordable care act and other
actions that produced the tea party
battled wave movement wave against him
and produced a decade of gridlock and
government being blocked from acting to
address any problem but it was rooted in
the election of Barack Obama and his
reelection which said that the new
America was winning and the new America
the fact that reelected an
african-american president said that
ultimately would win but what that
produced was an intense battle you know
again against them so while the election
of Barack Obama as president of states
was celebrated across the country in the
globe but his election brought to
fruition
the successive escalating battles of the
juubi against civil rights abortion and
immigration he embodied the political
triumph of the new America and the
Democratic Party that controlled all
branches of government this activism was
resisted by the tea party that carried
the GOP social mission into battle they
produce an explosive growth of racial
and partisan polarization that put a tea
party dominated yupi in charge of most
of the country for a decade
and most people don't recognize in fact
that this wasn't just a shellacking as
President Obama talked about 2010 and we
didn't know it at the time they brought
government to a halt they produced a IMF
white budget austerity on the federal
budget and they cut budgets across the
states where they had control which was
in most of the states that cut education
spending they blocked the government
addressing any of the evolving problems
so the government was impotent to
address problems of inequality wage
stagnation the loss of wealth climate
change salt weapon violence problem
after problem government with stops in
its track from acting at the national
level at the state level for a decade
and that has built up in my view and I
think we're watching it in the in the
huge demand for government action we now
see the support for government action at
the highest level we have seen in our
you know and are pulling in all of so
what we've come to I think is a is a is
a a Republican Party where Donald Trump
emerged through his control of the Tea
Party's dominance of the Tea Party
coalition with the evangelicals expanded
it to conservative Catholics that liked
his America first populism and under and
in that coalition that in that fight
against new America they've driven away
moderate women in particular they've
ever annoy independence and they've all
had driven away secular conservatives
who hate the Tea Party dominance of the
Republican Party and now seventy percent
in our current polls seventy percent of
the Republican Party now are the Tea
Party the evangelicals and observed
Catholic so it is a wholly religious
party even more religious than it's ever
been with a tea party battle that is
particularly focused on fighting
government
so what that has produced is a moment
where I believe we will see the demise
of the publican party and the reason why
I focus on the demise of the party
rather than I think just the idea that
they are about to lose a lection and I'm
in a blue wave I think most people are
looking at this in a linear and Static
way when you read the book you won't
you'll actually see in ever in each area
that I focus on every trend is
accelerating every sin every trend is
interacting with each other every trend
is producing a reaction that is
multiplying the effects of this Trump
battle drop Republican battle against
the new America so we're watching in
demographic trends and I have updated my
this book for my last book but if you
look at just the growth in percentage
foreign-born it's accelerating it's
never been higher than it is right now
there may be Donald Trump in the office
but there's nothing that he can do that
can keep this country of being more
diverse or farm born more secular or
millennial every trend is accelerating
the but that's that's produced a
reaction amongst the Republicans so that
in reaction to those trends to fight
those friends it's meant that the Tea
Party Evangelic will block that is the
base for Trump has grown even stronger
and driven out the more moderate and
secular parts of the Republican Party so
the only thing left is kind of a
California type Republican Party that is
worried only about the demographic
problem and how to keep this new
majority from using government to
address to govern on their behalf and
then we have the reaction to in each
area as the as the as they have
suppressed government from doing
anything addressing any problem we see a
huge growth in the American people
wanting to use government for public
purposes and that's reflected in what's
in
reaction to candidates in the Democratic
primaries we see a growth in support for
multiculturalism but let me end on
immigration because you would think that
this story he's able to play that card
again in the end as I wrote in the in my
New York Times op-ed people basically
think that race has come to matter at so
many people had so many of these
junctures and he has somehow got elected
in 16 and we know that race was a
significant part of what brought him
there but he's been playing immigration
since he came in in 2018 he waged the
2018 election a high turnout electrode
not a you know not something that was
Courtney is one of the highest
turnaround election we've ever had in
her off year he said five thousand
troops of the border focused on the
caravan coming to America the hiding
terrorists had ads with with
undocumented immigrants who had killed
you know police officers it was all-out
ban and war in the 2018 election they
lost in a landslide in eighteen but they
also lost on that issue so if you asked
if you asked by the immigration was
benefiting or hurting the country it was
by a twenty point margin people's headed
benefit at the margin was eight point
six percent was double the vote margin
in fact if you look at his job approval
yesterday his job approval which was
dropping to thirty eight percent but his
job move on handling immigration was
lower so somehow people think if you'll
only get the immigration anything right
that'll somehow work come around for him
the immigration is she was taking him
down because the what's happened with
his election is that the American people
became engaged we saw it in the
resistance but they've also become more
conscious of their values so we've gone
from 50% believing the country benefits
of immigration
to 65% now I mean reaction to what he's
doing look at what happened in North
Carolina where they used immigration to
try to grow you know Drive the election
it was a ten point swing compared to
2016 and that in that in that seat
exactly what would happen in 2018
election elsewhere in the country the it
does not work immigration hurts it and
the challenge I think for the Republican
Party coming out of this is or they are
they the California Republican Party the
California Republican Party battled the
demographic problem they lost every
often have lost every office and have
only become more extreme if you look and
see who's taken positions in the state
legislature in California but those who
led that effort or in the white house
including Steve Miller are are part of
the Trump White House how do they how
does the party react to that you to the
being beaten
despite their focused on the demographic
problem and immigration when the country
is saying we are a multicultural country
the more you make this battle the more
we but we accept our history and our
diversity I think we have two challenges
'm a challenge for the robbing party
what do they do next I used to think
there would be a battle between the
socially liberal parts of publican Party
and the Tea Party evangelical but
they've driven those segments out so I
don't know what happens you know the day
after the question will be do Democrats
look at this moment as well and take
advantage of this opportunity this is
not a moment for bipartisanship this is
a party in disrepute this is a party
that's losing it's losing its the the
members that would be simple and able to
be part of any kind of bipartisan effort
this is a period in which the public is
desperate for a government that will
address problems
is a this is a a period in which we have
a people when a government accepts that
we're a multicultural country with
equality for a whole range of groups we
have a whole range of problems but if
you have a Republican Party that's no
longer relevant
our Democrats up to the scale of the
challenges that come with taking on a
activist government at this moment thank
you very much so if you do have
questions because these Fanus here I do
have a microphone so please raise your
hand and I'll get over to you as best I
can thanks very much standard data
marshals good to see you again
congratulations on their job book a
couple of questions maybe for you one is
with this the question question about a
competition for the Democratic Party
going forward we don't want I don't
think a one-party country what kind of
resolution do you see going forward that
makes sense for the countries as a whole
and the other one that I think is more
of a profound issue some of this
bothering me I think many of us very
much agree with your idea about personal
United States is moving in a
multicultural direction the diverse to
that direction these are positives for
the United States but one thing which I
think might help those who are not
completely convinced by that is if that
we could eject some element of new areas
where we can unify the country where are
the areas of unity what is it that
brings the country together at a time of
such great diversity I think that those
elements will be important I think I
recall President Clinton once said that
one of his roles was to try to make
change safe this might be a way to help
make that kind of very fundamental
change seemed safer for people that are
wondering who are all these people come
here what unites us as a car
[Music]
well I think what I think what unites us
is a desire for America to be a country
in which there is a middle class that
can prosper and that young the next
generation can have a future and this
can be a country again that had the had
the kind of ambition and kind of unity
and patriotism that came when working
with people of all types were able to
prosper for me that means not that we
have a unity that goes cross-party I
think we're at a moment of time I for me
this looks like the wigs looks like that
a populist era or you had populist
parties that one it looks like 1932 and
36 when there's a Democratic Party this
is a time the government we've had a
decade of not being able to address a
massive rise of inequality
loss of wealth wage stagnation climate
change gun violence massive gun violence
slaughter we're have been impotent
politics as made as impotent and we were
desperate to address those problem we
actually have are very unified on one
who addressed those big problems and if
you look at Democrats this is the
Democrats time to govern and if you look
at Democrats they want to address these
problems their economic their cultural
and they unify Democrats if you look at
the Democrats about 75 to 80% almost any
issue that you put out on the table they
want us to address they want their
political leaders who address after
they've been blocked from governing I
think by a tea party evangelical revolt
to keep them from governor I think we've
been stopped for a decade Trump is
taking it to the most extreme to keep it
us from governing I actually think is a
moment to be empowered and reformed as
the period for reform I haven't
mentioned the corruption that is central
that's the big money that was also a lot
this the anger with how big business has
become its influence the the the role of
big corporate money in politics all of
which have made people believe polities
that does not work for the average
person so I think this is a reform
period at the moment for reform action
disruptive change I think it's a it's a
moment for that kind of engagement I
[Music]
stand congratulations thanks two
questions the first is there's so much
sense about Trump and and that he should
be beatable at the same time there's a
lot of discussion as you know that there
are divisions among Democrats that
there's a lot of tensions and that that
could undermine the ability to win in 20
in the next election so I'd be
interested in your coming that the only
thing that I wanted to you made a really
interesting point about religion and how
that's playing so you have a Republican
Party that is looking more and more
extremely than religiously you have a
Democratic Party that you know the DNC
just adopted a resolution lifting not
the unaffiliated and making clear that
that's an important moral feelings and
so they are clearly feeling pressure to
speak to the non-religious right it was
kind of interested in your comment on
more unaffiliated than mainline
Protestants yeah no I didn't spend a lot
of time talking about the new America
and it's cuz I mean I have a chapter on
how to Democrats let Donald Trump win
because people are have Adam had huge
struggles we've had a you know loss of
wealth enormous financial strains
structural changes uh you know issues
with cost with health care you know
child care housing that make it very
hard to get by people are really at the
edge and the
religious issues are not so much
religious issues for most people it's
survival people are at the edge they're
looking for government that's on their
side and that's a pretty fundamental
change that they are looking for but the
reform the corruption is a big piece of
why they turned away from Trump and the
and the and the the fact that tarp the
bailout of the banks but not but nothing
done for people in with their houses and
their mortgages it's kind of a defining
moment Democrats were part of the
problem Democrats were not seem to get
it to understand how much of how big a
struggle it is and so they are looking
for leaders who understand how big a
struggle life is how corrupt politics
has been they need to break the the
Nexus of business and politicians that
keeps government for working for the
average person these are big issues that
have all been bottled up not to mention
climate change and issues and gun
violence and the opioid crisis but
government has done nothing for decade
purposely this has been a tea party
dominance and has purposely both
disempowered government but also argued
that government is powerless you know to
address these problems you know if you
look at the conservative side why our
people are idle because the government
incentives you know for idleness you
know it's so clueless and small when
people are looking for for big big
government that is activists and read
and addressing their problems so our IP
has an idiomatic meaning it's on a
tombstone but Irish Catholic girl Latin
scholar here says the rest class got in
pot a rest in peace look you raise a
serious issue lots of data and lots of
evidence of on the way people reacting
to these trends and to losing power and
Trump losing power I think will be
symbolic in the same way that Barack
Obama being elected and re-elected with
symbolic so we've already seen reactions
that are playing out I'm worried about
those reactions the I don't know there
really does need to be a Republican
Party people ask the question it really
does need to be a Republican Party that
is an opposition to the Democrats but I
don't know how you get there given the
California experience or how you get
there in the short term if I look at the
Democrats you know it took us enough for
national elections before we elected
somebody that could win nationally and I
worked for Bill Clinton but we had a lot
of battles internal battles as a party
bitter battles but I remember but I
remember when Bill Clinton was running
and there were a whole range of unions
that were supporting him that had no
good reason to support him given where
his stand was on on NAFTA and other and
other issues and they just said we've
gotta win which is we can't be out of
power we can't be out of power any
longer we you know we've got to win the
stakes are too high what happens with
the business coalition other public
party what happens with Fox News yeah
the I mean look I think this election
and they're probably another election in
which the current contours play out it
was easier before when they were divided
down the middle between the socially
liberal part and the key party
evangelical part what's easy but then
we're gonna have a battle over you know
what your what their party stood for
it's much harder when you've driven
those voters out and how do you know how
do you get them back you know you had
Perot you went out and pro voters I
think ultimately came back to the
Republicans or his voters
and so maybe there's you know in this
process it's something that brings them
back the issue is how do they become a
relevant party I mean you have working
fountain you have working families you
still have a party that is fighting
contraception I mean you can look at the
budget you know the federal budget next
year and they're still trying to defund
sex education their suit against the
Affordable Care Act was on contraception
I mean they have not just accepted the
sexual revolution it's not just abortion
they're obviously going to be a pro-life
party but they have to find a way they
used to it needs to have childcare
policies they used to have health care
policies they no longer have childcare
policies because that looks like it
privileges work over hope you know
homemakers I mean they have they have to
come to terms with being a modern party
and being relevant which is why you know
I've said this is they've been fighting
the social modernization of the country
this battle has you know has so made
them illegitimate and marginalized now
they've had to fight in in an extreme
way that's become more and more extreme
it's driven away their own voters
independent voters and has consolidated
Democrats determined to vote against
them and so we'll have this election
that hopefully sets up a period of
governance for reform but it's got a
there's got to be a process on
Republican side you know otherwise it
will be incentivized you know those who
seek you know non legitimate hi Ron I
like yes I want to build on Allen's for
his question about the positioning of
Democrats I want to do it by making the
statement but I'd like Peter treated as
a question so there's when you listen to
the first two debates the description of
the division between the Democrats
is that it's characterized as having
resolutely progressives and moderates
and somehow rather I don't feel
comfortable with that description when I
was listening to the debate you know I
was trying to figure out where are the
real differences between the candidates
and take health care which obviously I
care deeply about and and which was a
top issue in both of the debates if you
think about the spectrum of Democrats
all of them care about achieving
universal coverage maybe different
methodology but they all care about
universal coverage they all care about
getting costs down and so I'm just
wondering in terms of the positioning of
the Democrats whether the current theme
that has been developing about residues
and moderates how well or help really
that serves the Democratic Party in
terms of position for the upcoming yeah
I've been on come you know I've been
uncomfortable with it and if you read
the New York Times op-ed that I wrote
you know it begins with my discomfort
with the commentators who are talking
about them driving away the moderate
moderate voters with her over the top
you know plans for government or driving
away independents who are looking for
bipartisanship so I'm conscious of that
I I actually think that there's much
broader unity in the way you're talking
about I mean if you stretch from what
Biden proposed senator Harris proposed
Warren Sanders they're all very big new
government comfortably a much much
bigger role in health care bigger than
Obama care I mean by a lot this is a new
stage
government playing a much bigger role I
think the debate will refine where
Democrats go I'm not worried about it
there's a survey that was conducted by
against called morning consultant I
think it's being released tomorrow and I
was interviewed about it I read the
results today and it asked this
interesting question not whether you're
liberal moderate conservative it asked
whether the Democratic Party
social-democratic whether it's
conservative
whether it's liberal whether it's
moderate okay so only about about a
quarter said it was conservative only
about twenty percent says Social
Democratic but about sixty percent said
it's liberal and sixty percent said it
was moderate so you had people are
looking at the Democratic Party and
looking at the presidential process of
what they're concluding is they were
both liberal and moderate they don't
they don't they I think they're saying
what you're saying you know what I think
I'm saying is that this distinction is a
is a combinator distinction it's not a
voter distinction it's certainly not a
distinction amongst Democrats because I
think that the survey of Democrats I
think they view our party as both
liberal and moderate and they're
comfortable with and I think well our
candidates will find a way of getting to
a bold posture because that's where
they're starting witness is bold in
almost every area thanks for your talk
he was quite inspirational I'm the vice
chair of my Tony Democratic Party in a
pretty conservative town a county in
Ohio so I'd like to get like the title
of your book across my chest - sure it's
a future celebration but I wonder how
you would react one of my great concerns
going into the 2020 election which is
voter suppression efforts and other sort
of political machinations like we saw in
North Carolina's ninth or the Georgia
lieutenant governor's race and how much
Democrats are going to have to win by
more than they really should have - for
sure I mean I I look there's no doubt we
won
George and Florida in 2018 and when we
take we kind of take that for granted
that the that that happened as part of
our wave discussion but just think what
that discussion would have looked like
if in fact we african-american
candidates had won have become governor
in those two states and held the
Senators position as well but the
there's no doubt that voter suppression
was prominent we've gained more control
of state government and so there's
there's less room for but there isn't
any doubt mistakes are so high that
voter suppression is going to be carried
you know forward I'm sure in Florida and
Georgia at a great rate maybe Texas
though you know the stakes are very high
and so we do we will have the win by a
much bigger margin if you look at the
the margin in the 2018 election was
eight point six percent but we're we're
looking at about a ten point spread when
you look at who's voting who says
they're going to vote in the Democratic
primaries and Republican primaries it's
like 47 percent 37 percent if you look
at the gap on approval disapproval of
Trump you're looking at over tenth you
know over over ten points so I think we
have to push to that scale the I do
think you know there will be some price
in our candidates and whether they and
whether they you know appeal broadly and
you know undie plea and the Senate is
you know is critical that we win the
Senate this would be a tragic election
if we came out of it with Mitch
McConnell still in control you know of
the Senate right now if you look at the
different presidential candidates
you basically have Biden you know about
you know 10 12 points ahead of Trump you
have other candidates they had by eight
Warren you know seven I think
recent poll and are on average now
that's bigger that's a bigger lead than
Obama had 2008 but it's not the biggest
but it's not the biggest possible
now maybe she grows in her
in her position she's clearly grown and
support over time but we've reached a
point where Democrats are so
consolidated and intense that it may be
that almost any candidate you know
starts with a seven-point margin and up
but do we need the bigger to overcome
what's happening to you know bars
legitimate voting to make sure we
wouldn't the Senate some time for
another era when is your questions
[Music]
something you just said triggered a
question which is how important to our
independence going to be in 2020 it
sometimes seems to me that in elections
Democrats focus so much on getting
independence that they don't focus
enough and getting the base so how
important is that going to be I think
I've become a base person because the
the because I believe I believe in
that's how that's how Trump won and that
and I think that's how Hillary did not
win when you read my book you'll see you
know you'll read the frustrating emails
going back and forth with Robbie which
I'm Banesto at Robby Mook in the Hillary
Clinton campaign on the fact that
Sanders voters were not consolidated and
trying to get them to pay attention to
them you know at the end forty five
percent of Democrats voted you know for
Sanders coming into that you know and
recalling that they voted that and you
know we were I think losing fifteen
percent they're very liberal voters that
we were losing fifteen percent of them
and we did and they did decline to try
to consolidate those voters and so I
believe that what's happened in eighteen
was a consolidation of Democrats and
high turnout the Democratic base
including me independence is at a forty
eight percent right now in our polls
we're winning over 90 percent of those
voters those voters are if you asked
whether they disapprove of Trumpets at
87 percent of Democrats disapprove of
Trump it's like 67 percent of
Republicans strongly approve so our
voters are much more engaged much more
anti Trump
I very consolidate and I think it's the
reason why almost every Democrat is
doing well now you do have 10% who are
independents now but I think the
starting point is you know is a base
that believes in those candidate
believes that that train just changes
coming and I think our candidates are
you know getting that now increasingly
when you look at independence the Trump
the margin for Trump on his approval is
my is -15 in our polls Biden was winning
them by 10 Warren was winning them by 5
so we were winning independence but it
varied by you know by Canada and it
wasn't at the highest level possible
given aware of how they view Trump so
there was still room to make gains with
independents but there's a bigger gain
that comes with consolidating the 48% of
the electorate that's there and they're
being intensely involved also there is a
level of engagement we've never seen
before we asked a question someone to 10
scale 10 being following politics
extremely closely now it always goes up
at the at the end of the election
October November then it drops sharply
and then goes up month by month until
you get to the end of the election and
hits its high point and then drops again
alright in 2018 in the off year election
that are that number and our polling was
higher than the presidential level in 16
so people were following piles more
closely at the end of the 18 election
than they had in the presidential
election so who was a presidential level
engagement we have now done two polls in
January and July the numbers gone up 10
points it can go down in every election
we've ever done the number drops after
the last election the number today is
higher than it was an 18
when it produces the historic turnout
highest turnout we've ever seen
so group so groups we worked with are
now going out early and talking to
unregistered voters and seeing are they
really engaged we have found women in
particular are following very closely
trum motivates and engages them he's in
their face every day and is impacting
the election wait we've never seen
before so I think there's gonna be a
expand that electorate beyond anything
we've seen before
you know affecting this this is driven
by hostility Trump and driven also by
the belief that finally there's going to
be critical change I think it's a be
heavily driven by the base but we're
winning independents just question of by
what margin
[Music]
you had mentioned what happens in 2020
if the Republicans still hold the Senate
if that does occur what does that do for
the death of the Republican Party well
look if the we're watching a trend
that's not changing at state level I
mean we we watch major you know major
changes that you know happened are
getting back governorships control of
Secretary of State's huge number of
legislative seats that's going to
continue to continue we're gonna get new
reapportionment so the trend at state
level and at the executive level will
continue particularly elect the
president which I presume will happen
and obviously there's a lot of room for
executive use of executive power if you
are blocked again hopefully we're not
doing that but if you're blocked again
but I think it'll be incredibly
dispiriting for our own people I'm not
sure about the Republican Party you know
what would have happened if Hillary had
one and then blocked him doing anything
as president would we have gotten
slaughtered in the last elections they
controlled reapportionment it would have
been painful
going forward but our people will be
very dispiriting ended up being blocked
from being able to pass any legislation
if you can't raise taxes you can't raise
revenue in fundamental ways you can't
address you know their problems you know
I saw in Bloomberg that a description of
what would happen to the wealth of the
of the of the richest globally of
billionaires and it was like up to about
a third of what it was and and they
looked at it and said you know be warned
I looked at it and said well isn't that
reasonable not just to cut the wealth
but obviously to use those funds to do
important things but I think being
that's being innovative able to use
government depends on revenue and acting
in bold ways it's very hard to do it
unless you have the Senate I think will
be affected in some ways more than
Republicans they still don't have a way
out you know they're just there in some
ways they're left just blocking you know
maybe there'll be some you know new
segment that wants me bipartisan coming
out of that but I don't i doubt i think
the Trump faction will be even more
dominant after the election I'm gonna do
I have the honors of the last question
unless somebody else hasn't had a chance
but first of all thank you again for
coming and Stan I just I have sort of a
polling question because I wish you were
at the breakfast table every morning to
interpret all these polls that keep
coming up but you're not so we all have
to sort of decide what we think of them
and try to interpret them and I know a
lot of people would just say oh you know
the polls were always wrong in the
previous elections we can't trust them
they don't mean anything so can you just
give us a quick little primer on how to
read polls now which ones to pay
attention to which ones do matter which
don't and whether we should believe any
figures okay it's a good question and
when I get all the time but it's still a
good question hmm
the first of all the national polling
was not that far off in terms of where
you know the margin but the state polls
are very uneven in their quality and you
frequently go through long periods with
no put you know no polls of the you know
at the state level and so that you know
that's where it got it wrong very wrong
but the but it was also related to
failing to represent enough
working-class voters in those polls you
know if you believe the exit polls they
had a much larger educated portion of
the electorate it turns out the exit
polls are wrong most of us as policy
would a virgin sure so we average
between the Census and the exit polls on
the on education right after the 2016
election we just went with the census
which gives you a working class
population that's about 63% of
registered voters so people need to keep
in their mind there's such a large
portion of the country is working class
man and they played it disproportionate
role Woods in 16 and there's no reason
to think that they won't as well and the
elections but for all right well thank
you so much can we get one more round of
applause
you